Version Control:
Or How To Control Your Versions While Looking Good in Pleated Jeans

Stardate 9/19/2014

This has been an interesting week, to say the least. It was the first dip into the Phase 0 pool, but it happpened to land on the worst possible week because I was just coming back from Japan and moving to a new city, which meant me being very, very busy. But it all worked out in the end, and me writing this shows that I'm well on my way to finishing the first week of exercises and lessons all in due course.

But what were all of those lessons about this past week? Most of my time was trying to figure out how to get PowerShell to work with all of the setup needed, but it was a lot of fun researching how to get it done right and what things I need to finagle to get others working just right. I learned a lot about how PowerShell works just by trying to figure out how to get the subl command functioning the way I want it to, and I got to send that info along to a lot of great people over in the DBC Google+ Community page. Sharing is caring after all.

But once all of that was set-up it came time to get down to the nitty-gritty, or should I say nitty-Gitty. I don't even care if that pun gets me kicked out of the program--it was worth every bit.

Git and GitHub, those were new to me. I knew about GitHub from some programmer friends who helped me out when I first started learning this stuff from online resources, but I had no idea what the deal was with it. I know now, and it's pretty swell. I mean, I'm writing a blog right now and I don't even have to open my browser to post it, edit it, update it, or even write it! I mean I did when I was cloning, but otherwise it's clean as free.

But how is this all possible? Well, version control, of course! One of the functions of Git is to let you update your online master repository on GitHub, or the version you want to be your final version. By cloning that repository onto your computer you get to work on it offline and without having to worry about making changes to the final product. Then once you have the change you want, you can send it along as a commit and push it through to GitHub to make the changes live. Of course if you are working as a team you can also make push requests so that people on your team can double-check your work before it's made final. Once this commit is made, it gets logged and is logged with a message that will let others know what the point of that change was. This is the handiest bit in Git when it comes to version control.

If you have a bug that needs fixing, or just want to see when something was added, all you have to do is go through the Git log and look up the message that explains why something was added or changed the way it was. This is also why making concise and verbose messages (as appropriate) is incredibly important, because you need to properly label your changes if you want someone to look them up. In a big team, there can be an astronomical amount of changes made, and can you imagine going through all of these changes in the Git log looking for a single one without it having any keywords associated with it? "Changed something in the program" is not an okay thing to write, and no amount of pleated jeans can help you make it an okay thing to do. Even pleats have limits. With version control, you can go back to the exact moment when the bad bug was added to the program and change it, like a time traveller! That's what makes version control so necessary.

But it doesn't have to just be for other people to check the work from the rest of their team! It can be just you, but if you are working on a team, and that team is all over the world, you're going to want to maybe use GitHub to work on your projects. It's essentially a way to get anyone who has an internet connection (and the appropriate privileges) to work on the same repository (through their own individual branches) as if you were a bunch of friends sitting in the same room. It makes things easier, but then if you want to make that code public and Open Source it, you can get millions of users to make use of the work you've made! Open source means that the program you wrote is available for everyone to see, and all of those people will in turn have a chance to work on it, use it in their projects, or even change it and make something new out of it on their own time! It's wonderful! Just make sure you know what you're doing when it comes to the licenses. I won't write them all out for you here, but take a Google and find out what they all do when you have the time.

And basically that's been the first week of Phase 0--Git and GitHub. I've already got some basic experience when it comes to actually writing out the logic for programs, but I've never used this before and it's truly a wizard machine. I'm having a lot of fun with it and I hope you will, too. Now I don't have the time here to go into detail about the pleats, but tune in next week and maybe I'll reveal a bit more there. Until then: until then.

Bane